March 2023
How much aid actually
reaches the countries with
the greatest poverty?
Facts and principles of ODA allocation
Report
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty? / devinit.org
0Contents
Acknowledgements ......................................................................................................... 2
Acronyms ........................................................................................................................ 3
Executive summary ......................................................................................................... 4
Chapter 1. ODA remains critical in addressing wider international financing needs ...... 8
Chapter 2. Unpacking ODA numbers – behind the recent headlines ........................... 14
Chapter 3. Allocation in practice: what is spent, where and how? ............................... 23
Chapter 4. Principles of ODA allocation ........................................................................ 32
Conclusion .................................................................................................................... 38
Annex 1. Comparative advantages of different resources for ending poverty .............. 39
Annex 2. Methodology .................................................................................................. 41
Annex 3. Spending on non-transfer ODA by G7 countries ........................................... 42
Notes ............................................................................................................................. 45
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty?
/ devinit.org
1Acknowledgements
The lead authors of this report are Maria Ana Jalles d’Orey and Euan Ritchie. We are
grateful to all those who contributed to the report.
At Development Initiatives: Daniel Coppard, advice on the content and framing of the
research; Matt Bartlett, project management; Rob Tew, multilateral analysis and data
checking; Martha Jackson and Simon Murphy, production management.
Copyediting: Nina Behrman.
Research and background notes on ODA allocation frameworks and sectors which
disproportionally benefit the poor: Willem Luijkx and Hilary Jeune.
Expert information and advice from the bilateral and multilateral organisations identified in
Annex 2 and other key DI partners.
The programme’s funders: the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.
Thank you.
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty? / devinit.org
2Acronyms
CPA country-programmable aid
CRS Creditor Reporting System (OECD DAC)
DAC Development Assistance Committee (OECD)
DFI development finance institution
DI Development Initiatives
DRM domestic resource mobilisation
GDP gross domestic product
GNI gross national income
GPG global public goods
GPI Global Public Investment
IMF International Monetary Fund
LDC least developed country
LIC low-income country
LMIC lower middle-income country
MDB multilateral development bank
ODA official development assistance
OECD Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
SDG Sustainable Development Goal
TOSSD Total Official Support for Sustainable Development
UMIC upper middle-income country
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty? / devinit.org
3Executive summary
Global challenges are driving aid away from targeted
development investments in the countries with greatest poverty
Even before the Covid-19 pandemic and the Ukraine war, there were clear concerns
about the zero-sum implications of competition for official development assistance (ODA).
These concerns included the use of ODA to finance global public goods (GPGs), the rise
of emergency humanitarian assistance as a growing proportion of ODA in the face of
growing humanitarian needs and increasing use of ODA to leverage private finance with
no targeted development focus. 1
As a result of the pandemic and the effects of the Ukraine war, increased demands for
ODA became evident in stronger calls for: (a) investments in GPGs, and (b) investments
that also serve national self-interest. The rise of transnational development challenges
such as global health, climate change and security means that GPGs are competing with
traditional development priorities: there are calls for investment in both global initiatives
and in countries other than those with the lowest incomes, as wealthier countries are
considered better able to drive regional and global progress in areas such as political and
environmental security. The result is reduced ODA to countries experiencing the greatest
poverty. In other words, the additional needs generated by these external events mean
there is less funding left to spend on traditional priorities in the countries needing it the
most.
The comparative role of ODA in meeting growing global needs
ODA is a limited resource that needs to be focused and used wisely where it is most
needed to maximise its comparative advantage. If shared equally between every person
worldwide experiencing extreme poverty, the US$189 billion in gross ODA provided in
2021 equates to US$0.75 per person per day. Balancing growing, competing demands –
as well as other motivations and uses of ODA – while maintaining a focus on eradicating
poverty or promoting economic growth, is the fundamental challenge facing policymakers.
There is a diverse set of public and private sources of finance that, if used appropriately,
can contribute to development and a more equitable recovery. Development Initiatives
has long tracked the diverse set of global public and private finance available for poverty
reduction. 2 The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD’s)
initiative, Total Official Support for Sustainable Development (TOSSD), published its first
data collection in March 2021. 3 This initiative seeks to bring transparency to all official
resources and private finance mobilised by official interventions in support of sustainable
development, taking into account both cross-border flows and support to international
public goods.
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty?
/ devinit.org
4Objectives for investing different financial resources, as well as how they impact people in
greatest poverty, vary considerably (Annex 1). These underlying objectives drive quite
different patterns of distribution between and within countries in the Global South. For
instance, commercial foreign direct investment, concentrated in larger emerging
economies to support economically productive sectors, contrasts with remittance income
concentrated in countries with large diaspora populations. Differences in objectives,
motivations and advantages means that finance sources are not substitutable. It is thus
more important than ever to move beyond the question of just scaling up total financing
and focus instead on the quality of investments, backed up by political will to drive the
right choices. We need to focus on the types and sources of financing being used, the
areas where they are being invested and the people who are benefiting. 4
The financing needed to meet the Sustainable Development Goals remains substantial,
and further out of reach following global crises that resulted in both increased needs and
reduced national capacities to address them. One of the most recent and comprehensive
estimates 5 suggest that, by 2025, financing worth US$3.7 trillion will be needed in
emerging markets and developing economies other than China, rising to US$5.9 trillion in
2030. Much of this will be met by increases in domestic resource mobilisation and private
finance, although ODA has comparative advantage among international sources of
finance when it comes to reaching the people living in greatest poverty.
ODA is unique among official and other international development resources, playing a
central role in making and catalysing investments for people living in poverty and
increasing their resilience to shocks. A significantly larger proportion of ODA flows has
been directed to high-poverty countries, compared with other external sources of finance.
At the same time, to respond to multiple priorities, ODA has been dispersed more widely
than foreign direct investment or remittances, for example, which are more concentrated
in a limited group of countries with healthier economies or large diaspora. 6
ODA remains critical for the people and places with greatest
poverty
ODA, and grant financing in particular, has a comparative advantage in places where
other sources of finance are hard to raise. In practice, this means the countries with
greatest poverty. We use countries classed by the OECD’s Development Assistance
Committee (DAC) as either least developed (LDCs) or low-income countries (LICs) to
proxy this. 7 Out of 46 LDCs, 40 are now at moderate or greater risk of debt distress,
making loan financing problematic.
In many countries where poverty is deepest and domestic resources lowest, ODA
supports investments in key sectors for poverty reduction such as agriculture, education
and health. Similarly, ODA has a critical role to play as a key international public resource
directed towards climate adaptation in countries especially vulnerable to the impacts of
climate change.
ODA is particularly relevant for sectors that have low economic returns, such as health or
education, and where the private sector lacks incentives to operate. Unlike in the private
sector, a key driver for ODA is social rather than economic return. A potential exception is
impact investing, whereby private investors accept lower economic returns if their
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty?
/ devinit.org
5investment also achieves social returns. However, such investors still generally require
sufficient economic return to preserve their capital, and largely focus on high-income-
country markets. 8 Additionally, there is still much to learn about how the private sector
can support those living in the greatest poverty as well as the most vulnerable in social
sectors.
Furthermore, the necessity of focusing ODA on the countries of greatest poverty, such as
LDCs, will only increase. Currently, governments are discussing important reform efforts
of the multilateral development bank (MDB) system that will allow greater leverage of
MDB balance sheets to unlock hundreds of billions of additional development finance.
However, this additional finance is likely to be directed towards middle-income countries
(currently, only 16% of disbursements from MDBs are to LDCs) and will be largely in the
form of loans. Given that the majority of LDCs are currently at ‘moderate’ or higher risk of
debt distress, 9 there are question marks over the extent to which they can significantly
scale up even concessional borrowing.
It is therefore more important than ever to increase knowledge about the role and impact
of other types of finance and how they can be combined, sequenced and layered in
different contexts for maximum usefulness. We need also to limit perverse incentives.
such as using and inflating volumes of ODA when other types of non-concessional public
finance may be more appropriate.
We need a coherent allocation framework that prioritises the
people living in greatest poverty
This paper proposes the foundations of a decision-making framework that informs
allocations of development assistance that disproportionately prioritise the people living in
greatest poverty. ODA will retain a central role into the future, and there is now a critical
opportunity to define the criteria that identify how it can be used most effectively. In this
paper we argue for a more coherent vision of ODA that targets poverty directly. Donors
and governments need to know where their scarce concessional international public
finance can make the most difference in the absence of other sources of investment. The
international community needs to be more considerate about how ODA is spent to
address immediate crises and to drive sustained pathways out of poverty. We propose a
focus on ODA allocations that prioritise the people living in greatest poverty. Investments
must identify who will benefit, where and over what timeframe, as well as demonstrating
that they disproportionally benefit those living in poverty. This report focuses on the
fundamental role of ODA, reminding us that these considerations are more important than
ever before at a time when ODA is being appropriated by multiple and competing
interests.
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty?
/ devinit.org
6Introduction
Complex challenges threaten the global economy, and the countries with greatest poverty
are particularly affected. Pandemic recovery efforts, rising food insecurity, debt, inflation
and the Ukraine crisis are key challenges for the world. While international public
investment has a key role to play, it is not enough. Funding needs and gaps persist at the
global level and donors are faced with critical trade-offs between Global Public Goods
(GPGs) – such as tackling climate change and pandemics – and investing directly in
countries themselves.
Attention has recently turned to other ways of raising financing; notably reforms of the
way multilateral development banks (MDBs) operate that could significantly scale up their
lending. While MDBs reform – in particular, capital adequacy reform – has the potential to
unlock hundreds of billions of additional development finance, this additional financing will
nearly all be in the form of loans and is far more likely to benefit middle-income countries.
Similarly, private finance is needed, but questions remain on the data, transparency,
impact and measurement of impact investments and the role of key players such as
development finance institutions. Furthermore, the way in which global mechanisms
support national and international needs and priorities is beginning to involve – through
Global Public Investment (GPI), for example – but in the interim ODA remains critical to
the reduction of poverty.
ODA plays a critical role, particularly in the countries with greatest poverty like least-
developed countries (LDCs) where domestic resources are scarce and access to
international markets is difficult. However, its scale is still small. As donors face choices of
where to strategically invest their money, it is important that they are aware of the
different trade-offs and the different routes towards poverty reduction.
This report unpacks critical trends in ODA to understand what is left to be invested in
countries with the greatest poverty. Given ODA’s comparative advantage in the poorest
places, this report suggests ways to strengthen the core value of aid in targeting poverty
reduction and proposes a set of principles for ODA allocation that put poverty at its core.
Drawing on qualitative and quantitative primary and secondary evidence, this report
provides a comprehensive analysis of ODA uses over the last decade, reflecting on the
impact that the rise of global challenges such as global health, climate and security have
on the role and purpose of ODA. Additional needs generated by these external events
mean there is less funding left for ODA to spend on traditional priorities in countries
needing it the most. In this report, we support the call for a coherent aid allocation
framework that prioritises the people living in greatest poverty.
Chapter 1 of this report summarises the scale of financing needed to meet the
Sustainable Development Goals, highlighting the critical value of ODA in the context of
other resources by focusing on places where poverty is greatest. Looking at what we call
‘non-transfer aid’ in Chapter 2, we then unpack the ODA numbers to explore what is left
to be invested in countries with greatest poverty. This allows us to present a more
nuanced picture of what gets spent, where and how in Chapter 3, focusing on how ODA
has targeted poverty. We end this report by proposing a set of principles for ODA
allocation that prioritise the people living in greatest poverty (Chapter 4).
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty?
/ devinit.org
7Chapter 1. ODA remains
critical in addressing wider
international financing
needs
To meet the SDGs, we need a significant and unprecedented
increase in finance
Estimates of total finance needed to meet the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
generally amount to trillions of dollars. One of the most recent and comprehensive
estimates (by Bhattacharya and colleagues at the London School of Economics) 10 builds
on a range of previous studies and finds that, by 2025, financing worth US$3.7 trillion will
be needed in emerging markets and developing economies other than China, rising to
US$5.9 trillion in 2030. These estimates are highly uncertain, 11 and a lack of financing is
not necessarily the only constraint. 12 Nevertheless, these figures are illustrative and
demonstrate the order of magnitude of new development finance needed.
Most of the required finance is likely to come from increases in domestic resource
mobilisation and private sector investment. The Bhattacharya report estimates that, in
2025, domestic resources would need to account for just under two-thirds of the total
finance, and that private sector finance would need to account for around one-fifth. This
would leave around 15% to be covered by additional external public finance, including
non-concessional flows from multilateral development banks (MDBs). While this is a
comparatively small share of the total, it would still amount to around US$557 billion
(nearly US$200 billion more than was spent in 2021). Of this amount, around half
(US$272 billion) would come from official development assistance (ODA).
The anticipated ODA spend would be equal to around 0.43% of gross national income
(GNI) of countries in the Development Assistance Committee (DAC) in 2025, according to
forecasts of the International Monetary Fund. This a greater share than has been spent
since 1968. The same recent study by Bhattacharya and colleagues 13 anticipates that
financing needs will grow faster than DAC-country GNI, meaning that, by 2030, the same
breakdown would imply that DAC countries would need an ODA/GNI ratio of 0.56%,
higher than has ever been achieved (see Figure 1 below). This breakdown is only
illustrative, but highlights that official finance, including ODA, will continue to play a major
role in meeting the SDGs. In addition, in this breakdown Bhattacharya and colleagues
anticipate that private finance could double by 2025 (Figure 2). If this large increase does
not materialise, the role for official finance will be even larger.
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty?
/ devinit.org
8Figure 1: Historic ODA/GNI ratios (gross disbursements) and projected need to
meet the SDGs, 1960–2029
0.6
0.5
ODA financing
needs inferred
from Bhattacharya
et al (2022)
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030
Source: Development Initiatives based on Bhattacharya et al. (2022) and OECD CRS.
Notes: ODA = official development assistance; GNI = gross national income; DAC = Development Assistance
Committee (OECD). ODA from DAC members in gross disbursements, constant 2020 US$.
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty?
/ devinit.org
9Figure 2: Estimated finance needs to meet the SDGs: 2019, 2025 and 2030
ODA disbursements
Official non-concessional
DRM
Private
US$ trillions
0
1
2
3
of which ODA:
US$0.2 trillion
0.7% of DAC GNI
Estimated total
SDG spend in 2025:
US$3.7 trillion
Financing needs estimate
0.7% of DAC GNI
5
Estimated total
SDG spend in 2019:
US$2.4 trillion
Financing needs estimate
4
Estimated total
SDG spend in 2030:
US$5.9 trillion
of which ODA:
US$0.3 trillion
of which ODA:
US$0.4 trillion
Financing needs estimate
0.7% of DAC GNI
Source: Development Initiatives based on Bhattacharya et al. (2022) and International Monetary Fund World
Economic Outlook forecasts.
Notes: SDG = Sustainable Development Goal; ODA = official development assistance; DAC = Development
Assistance Committee (OECD); DFI = development finance institution. ‘Estimated finance needs’ refers to
‘needs for emerging market developing economies other than China’. The figure for 2019 is Bhattacharya et
al.'s (2022) estimate of what was spent that year relating to the SDGs. The breakdown in subsequent years is
Bhattacharya et al.'s suggested breakdown of how total investment could be met, but if finance from one
category ends up being lower, others would need to be higher to compensate. 'Official non-concessional’
includes export credits and ‘other official flows’ from both multilaterals and DAC countries (which are mainly
non-concessional loans but include some equity investment from DFIs also). All figures here refer to gross
disbursements. 14
Why is ODA so critical, especially in places of greatest poverty?
Simply examining the share of ODA in the breakdown of estimated financing needs
understates its importance, as some countries will be more dependent than others on
increases in ODA. In most places, domestic resource mobilisation and private sector
investment might be expected to fill the majority of the investment gap. However, a large
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty? / devinit.org
10
6part of the required additional finance will be needed in places where raising additional
tax revenue, or attracting private finance, is difficult. 15 An alternative estimate of total
SDG financing needs 16 is broken down by country and suggests that around 25% of total
finance needs will be in countries that are currently least developed countries (LDCs)
and/or low-income countries. In absolute terms, this amounts to additional financing
needs in LDCs of at least US$230 billion in 2025.
These LDCs rely disproportionately on ODA. ODA was the largest source of external
finance in 2020: ODA disbursements to LDCs from DAC countries and multilaterals were
US$66 billion, compared to private flows worth $61 billion (foreign direct investment,
portfolio investment and other types of debt).
Even compared to tax revenue, ODA has an outsized importance. In 2018 (the latest year
for which data is available for all variables), ODA accounted for around 23% of total
finance in LDCs, including tax revenue and private investment (see Figure 3 below),
compared to only 6% for lower middle-income countries, and 1% for upper middle-income
countries. However, this still understates the importance of ODA for achieving the SDGs
in these countries, because neither tax revenue nor private finance will be spent entirely
on achieving the SDGs. For example, research by the International Monetary Fund found
that in Sub-Saharan Africa (home to the majority of LDCs) only a quarter of cross-border
private investment was spent in SDG-related sectors. 17 In addition, the World Bank
estimates that around 8% of total LDC government expenditure was on the military. 18
When adjusting for these figures, ODA accounts for 30% of SDG-related finance in LDCs
as a rough approximation.
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty?
/ devinit.org
11Figure 3: Breakdown of financing sources, 2018
100
90
27.1%
28.6%
35.4%
80
60
2.1%
1.5%
70
Private
investment
0.8%
3.4%
Official non-
concessional
0.5%
22.5%
ODA
disbursements
% 50
40
Tax revenue
65.9%
30
20
63.2%
48.8%
10
0
LDCs
LMICs
UMICs
Source: Development Initiatives (DI) based on World Bank data, OECD CRS, and DI’s internal international
resource flows dataset compiled from UN, World Bank and OECD sources.
Notes: LDC = least developed country; LMIC = lower middle-income country; UMIC = upper middle-income
country; ODA = official development assistance; CRS = Creditor Reporting System (OECD DAC). LDCs include
some countries that are middle-income according to World Bank income classifications, and therefore there is
some overlap between bars. 2018 was the latest year with full data.
Therefore, unless the financing mix changes, ODA to LDCs would need to double to meet
estimated finance needs (see Table 1 below). And changing the financing mix will be
difficult: one study found limited potential for LDCs to increase their tax revenue. 19 These
figures are highly approximate and subject to numerous caveats. 20 Nevertheless, they
demonstrate that ODA will continue to be essential in LDCs.
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty?
/ devinit.org
12Table 1: Share of SDG financing gap by country income group
Country grouping Share of financing gap (%) Estimated financing gap (US$
billion)
LDCs and/or LICs 25 >U$230 billion
LMICs 52 >US$480 billion
UMICs 23 >US$212 billion
Source: Development Initiatives based on Kharas and MacArthur (2019). 21
Notes: SDG = Sustainable Development Goal; LDC = least developed country; LIC = low-income country; LMIC
= lower middle-income country; UMIC = upper middle-income country.
Furthermore, these studies find that the sectors most likely to be important for SDGs are
those that are less appealing for private investors, as they are less likely to earn a return.
External public finance for these sectors is currently dominated by grants – 57% of total
disbursements in 2021 (and 70% in health) – and such financing is almost exclusively
funded from ODA. According to Bhattacharya and colleagues, 22 human capital
investments (health and education) account for more than half of additional investment
needs. We label these sectors as ‘pro-poor’ sectors, given that investments in these
sectors disproportionately benefit those living in extreme poverty, and will revisit them
later in this report (Chapter 3). One recent study estimates that around four-fifths of LDCs
cannot currently meet expenditure needs in health, education or social protection given
current revenue, suggesting an important role for outside finance. 23
Despite the uncertainty of these estimates, they demonstrate that the relevance and
importance of aid is as great as ever. ODA is unique in being able to target poverty
directly. But more ODA needs to be mobilised, better targeted to the people and countries
of greatest poverty, and better focused on the right mechanisms, channels, sectors and
modalities that build human capital and strengthen institutions. The next chapter looks at
global ODA trends and starts to unpack some numbers behind the ODA totals to explain
how much is left there to be invested in the countries with greatest poverty.
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty?
/ devinit.org
13Chapter 2. Unpacking ODA
numbers – behind the
recent headlines
ODA from DAC countries has increased, but not fast enough to
keep pace with new needs
Total gross official development assistance (ODA) from countries in the Development
Assistance Committee (DAC) increased from US$141 billion in 2011 to US$189 billion in
2021, an increase of 34%. This represents slower progress than in the previous decade:
gross ODA grew by 61% between 2001 and 2011. However, the 2000s was the decade
in which growth in ODA was the highest: it followed a steady decline in ODA
disbursements in the 1990s, and was spurred in part by the agreement of the Millennium
Development Goals.
Around US$33 billion of this increase came from additional bilateral ODA, with the
remaining US$15 billion coming from an increase in multilateral ODA (see Figure 4
below). However, this positive headline story – a 34% growth in gross ODA over the last
decade – is complicated by numerous factors. This chapter delves beneath these
headline numbers and finds that this increase has been wholly in response to specific
circumstances that have all increased need since 2011. 24 When these are taken into
account, aid left over for priorities that focus specifically on poverty reduction and
economic growth has declined over the last decade.
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty? / devinit.org
14Figure 4: Gross ODA from DAC countries, constant 2020 US$ billion, 2011–2021
200
180
160
Multilateral
140
120
Bilateral
100
80
60
40
20
0
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
Source: Development Initiatives based on OECD CRS.
Notes: ODA = official development assistance; DAC = Development Assistance Committee (OECD).
Recent growth in DAC bilateral ODA has been driven by special
circumstances which will continue into the future
Bilateral gross ODA from DAC countries grew to a new peak of US$136 billion in 2021,
an increase of 32% over the last decade. However, this has been driven by particular
circumstances that have generated new, additional needs, and the increase in ODA has
not been sufficient to meet these needs while maintaining expenditure on existing
priorities. When we exclude spending on Covid-related activities, in-donor refugee costs,
humanitarian assistance and climate-marked ODA, the remaining bilateral ODA from
DAC countries has declined by 7% since 2019 (before the Covid-19 pandemic) and by
19% since 2011 (see Figure 5 below).
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty?
/ devinit.org
15Figure 5: Composition of gross bilateral DAC ODA, 2011–2021
140
120
100
80
15
10
10
4
11
9
10
4
14
4
17
16
17
14
13
6
15
18
13
20
17
17
15
13
17 COVID response
20 Humanitarian
16
22
11
24
10
23 23
9 12
60
40
Climate ODA
In-donor refugee costs
Remaining ODA
79
75
78
72
69
73
74
72
70
66
65
20
0
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Source: Development Initiatives based on OECD-DAC.
Notes: DAC = Development Assistance Committee (OECD); ODA = official development assistance. Overlaps
between Covid response, humanitarian assistance and climate-marked ODA (principal and significant) have
been treated as follows: anything with a Covid keyword is shown under the Covid response category; anything
that is humanitarian and not also Covid is shown under the humanitarian category. Climate-marked ODA is
shown in its category only if it is not Covid-related or humanitarian assistance. The Covid ODA shown is based
on the ODA activities returned as 'Covid' in the CRS 'Keyword' field, rather than the DAC1 field ‘Total ODA for
Covid-19 activities’, which differs slightly.
Humanitarian needs
Humanitarian spending from ODA has grown by around 120% over the last decade, as
humanitarian emergencies have increased in severity in recent years. It is essential that
countries respond to these emergencies. But given that humanitarian need has increased
faster than total available development spending, there has been a reduction in ODA
spent in other sectors relative to the beginning of the decade. Consequently,
humanitarian spending accounted for 15% of bilateral aid in 2021, compared to 9% in
2011. Despite this increase, humanitarian assistance has not kept pace with need. The
funding coverage of humanitarian appeals has steadily declined over the last decade,
and although this changed in 2022 given the large response to Ukraine, the trend has
nevertheless been for humanitarian need to outpace financing. Humanitarian finance is
essential, but it is still displacing other types of development finance. For more
information, see Development Initiatives’ Global Humanitarian Assistance report 2022. 25
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty?
/ devinit.org
16Climate finance
Over the last decade, another notable shift in the composition of aid has been the growth
of bilateral aid spent on climate finance. This category of spending is controversial. While
there are overlaps with recognised aid spending that targets economic growth and
poverty reduction, wealthy countries committed to providing climate finance that was ‘new
and additional’ [UN], and there is a question as to whether climate finance should
therefore count as ODA. This argument is strongest for mitigation: many have questioned
whether mitigation finance should be ODA-eligible given that it is not primarily intended to
benefit lower-income countries, but the planet as a whole. 26 (For more on the benefits
and risks of targeting mitigation and development simultaneously, see DI’s latest
discussion paper. 27 ) But even for adaptation, similar arguments have been made. Even if
there is considerable overlap with development finance, there are nevertheless costs
specific to adaptation (such as seawall defences, for example) that have arisen since the
0.7% target was agreed. Some have argued that including adaptation in ODA is ethically
inappropriate given the different motivations behind the two. 28 However, it is difficult to
separate them in practice, given the similarity between many adaptation and
development goals 29 and the fact that both require highly concessional funds.
Nevertheless, bilateral aid marked as having a climate objective has grown substantially
over the last decade. In 2011, it accounted for 10% of bilateral ODA, but by 2021 this had
risen to 21%. Bilateral ODA with a mitigation focus increased from 8% to 12% over the
same period (more than doubling in absolute terms). There is significant uncertainty
about these figures, given issues around reporting, and some projects potentially having
been re-labelled so that countries can count projects towards the UN Framework
Convention on Climate Change US$100 billion goal. However, although question marks
remain over the exact extent to which aid is now being spent on climate goals, there has
clearly been an increase in climate spending in the last decade.
In-donor refugee costs
In-donor refugee costs have counted as ODA since 1988, but for most of this time they
have represented a very small part of the total. However, this category accounts for a
large proportion of the increase in bilateral aid since 2011. In-donor refugee costs rose
from 4.0% to 8.9% of bilateral ODA between 2011 and 2021. This is explored in more
detail further on.
Covid-19 response
In 2020 and 2021, donors increased aid in response to the Covid pandemic, spending an
estimated US$16 billion in bilateral aid in 2020 and US$17 billion in 2021. 30 While this
response was welcome, it was not enough to stop the reversal in development outcomes
in these years: the number of people living in extreme poverty increased by around 50
million between 2019 and 2021. 31 In addition, the 2021 increase in bilateral aid was
driven in part by the controversial inclusion of donations of excess vaccine doses. When
Covid spending is removed, bilateral aid spent on health declines between 2011 and
2021 by 12% (from US$14.0 billion to US$11.7 billion).
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty?
/ devinit.org
17Less bilateral ODA remains for longer-term goals
This highlights that the new, additional needs for which ODA was employed increased
faster than bilateral ODA volumes. A large share of these needs was responding to
urgent events as they unfolded, rather than on programmatic priorities that have greater
potential to foster long-term development. To be clear, responding to humanitarian
emergencies has always been a priority of ODA. But the fact that the additional needs
generated by such events has outpaced total aid spending has meant that there is less
left for more strategic, long-term priorities. The original purpose of ODA – which formed
the basis of the 0.7% target – related to increasing the ability of low- and middle-income
countries to invest in their economic development. While responding to pandemics and
providing for refugees are important in their own right, they do not contribute to this
goal. 32
While climate finance is necessary for countries to make sustainable investments, the
data suggests that it is currently coming at the expense of other necessary investments.
This is especially problematic when ODA is being used to fund investments that could
have attracted other types of finance. For example, it is estimated that US$300 billion in
investments is required to generate sufficient clean energy in Middle Eastern and African
countries (most of which are ODA-eligible) 33 every year. ODA cannot fund these needs
while also tackling poverty. Given that many such projects are likely to generate financial
returns, there could be other types of finance better suited to addressing this challenge.
Multilateral disbursements have followed a similar trend
The picture is similar when multilateral disbursements are included. While these
increased from US$43 billion to US$69 billion between 2011 and 2021 (an increase of
around 60%), this was largely in response to the above factors. When Covid,
humanitarian assistance and climate-marked ODA are removed, the increase is reduced
to US$10 billion (from US$39.0 billion to US$48.7 billion). While this is insufficient to fill
the gap left by the reduction in bilateral disbursements, it suggests that more of the
increase in multilateral disbursements was towards ‘traditional’ development priorities.
However, this understates the increase in disbursements with a climate focus, given that
most multilaterals do not use the Rio marker to indicate such projects. When this is
accounted for, the trend looks similar to the bilateral trend.
For example, around US$0.5 billion of the increase in multilateral disbursements was
from climate-specific funds. Furthermore, between 2012–2013 and 2019–2020, the
International Development Association increased its share of commitments focused on
climate change from 14% to 32%. The weighted-average share of climate-related
concessional disbursements from multilateral organisations that report climate finance to
the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), increased from
around 24% in 2012–2013 to 36% in 2019–2020. 34 If these shares are assumed to be
similar to those in 2011 and 2021 respectively, then around US$8 billion of the increase
in disbursements from multilaterals would be climate related. This is only indicative given
data constraints. But it highlights that multilateral ODA disbursements have followed
broadly the same trend as bilateral ODA, and, if accurate, implies that disbursements
from DAC and multilaterals for long-term, development-specific priorities fell by around
US$14 billion between 2011 and 2021.
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty?
/ devinit.org
18The share of ODA spent within donor countries remains high
Another important factor in understanding the headline increases in ODA is that a large
share of aid does not actually reach partner countries. We describe this as ‘non-transfer’
ODA and argue that this is a critical part of ODA that needs to be considered to better
understand what gets spent in countries. Non-transfer ODA refers to six categories: in-
donor refugee costs, debt relief, administrative costs not elsewhere classified, imputed
student costs, in-donor scholarships and promotion of development awareness. The
inclusion of some of these costs in ODA is controversial. For example, civil society
organisations have long criticised the inclusion of in-donor refugee costs. 35 While these
may represent useful expenditure (for example, administrative costs may include
expenditure on project evaluation or skilled staff), this does not necessarily mean they
should count as ODA, and they nevertheless do not increase resources available for low-
or middle-income countries.
Box 1: Country-programmable aid and transfer aid
Transfer aid is similar in nature to ‘country-programmable aid’ (CPA); a concept
developed by the OECD in 2011 to track aid that is (or could be) subject to multi-
year planning, and a better measure of what partner countries actually receive.
CPA is a valuable concept and given its focus on aid that can be planned for, is
arguably a more appropriate measure for which to set targets. 36 However, there
are important differences between CPA and transfer aid, which make the former
less appropriate for our purposes. Because of its focus on programmable aid, CPA
excludes humanitarian assistance, which is an important (and growing) part of
transfer aid. In addition, CPA does not include aid that cannot be allocated by
country. While such aid is often non-transfer, it also includes core funding for
NGOs, and contributions to pooled funds that are ultimately spent in partner
countries and therefore included in transfer aid. Both concepts have their uses, but
for the purposes of tracking what countries actually receive, our focus in this report
is on transfer ODA.
These non-transfer components have always represented a substantial share of
ODA. They have accounted for 14% of total ODA on average since 2011, and 15%
on average since 1990. In fact, aside from a few spikes owing to various causes
(explored below), the share of non-transfer ODA has remained close to this
average. Conversely, this means that ODA that actually reaches partner countries
(including indirectly via core multilateral ODA) has averaged 86% of the total. In
2021, total ODA was US$189 billion in gross disbursement terms, but a maximum
of US$163 billion reached low- and middle-income countries (including aid directed
through multilaterals).
However, the composition of such non-transfer aid has changed significantly over
time. Historically, by far the largest component of non-transfer aid has been debt
relief, accounting for 8% of total ODA on average during the 1990s and 2000s,
Debt relief reached its peak in 2005 when it accounted for 21.7% of total ODA.
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty?
/ devinit.org
19This was heavily concentrated in G7 countries: France, Germany, Italy, Japan and
the United Kingdom each spent over 30% of total ODA on debt relief in 2005. As
the largest economies in the DAC over the last few decades, 37 these countries
have a large bearing on overall ODA trends (see Figure 6 below). Spending on
non-transfer ODA in each G7 country is detailed further in Annex 3.
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty?
/ devinit.org
20Figure 6: In-donor refugee costs and debt relief from DAC countries as a share of
total ODA, 1990–2021
25
In-donor refugee costs
Debt relief
20
15
10
5
0
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
2020
Source: Development Initiatives based on OECD DAC Table 1.
Notes: ODA = official development assistance; DAC = Development Assistance Committee (OECD).
Since 2013, debt relief has accounted for less than 1% of non-transfer ODA on average.
It has been replaced as the largest non-transfer category by in-donor refugee costs, as
conflict in the Middle East has led to large numbers of people seeking asylum in DAC
countries. Germany was at the heart of this change. It increased expenditure on in-donor
refugee costs 45-fold between 2014 and 2016, from US$163 million to US$7.3 billion. In
2016, this was 25% of Germany’s total ODA (although Germany also increased transfer
aid by 32% over the same period). Germany was the country spending the most on in-
donor refugee costs from 2015 until 2021 when the US tripled its spending on in-donor
refugee costs. The UK also dramatically increased its spending on in-donor refugee costs
between 2019 and 2021, in part due to a sharp increase in accommodation costs. 38
The recent increase in ODA spent on in-donor refugee costs is partly explained by an
increase in people seeking asylum in DAC countries: applications for asylum in DAC
countries tripled between 2006 and 2021. However, this does not account for the full
increase. The amount spent on in-donor refugee costs increased nearly six-fold in
constant prices. While the number of asylum applications is not a perfect measure of
need, using this as a proxy suggests that per capita in-donor refugee costs have doubled
over this period: from around US$5,500 spent on in-donor refugee costs per asylum
application received by the DAC in 2006, to US$11,100 in 2021. This is partly explained
by countries choosing to count more ODA in this category when the issue became more
prominent. For example, before 2009 the UK did not count any in-donor refugee costs
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty?
/ devinit.org
21despite incurring eligible costs, but by 2021 this category accounted for 9% of the UK’s
total ODA.
Non-transfer ODA is set to increase sharply in 2022 and beyond
From 2022 onwards, the percentage of ODA spent on non-transfer categories is set to
increase dramatically. Following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, a large number of
Ukrainians have sought refuge in Europe, and so it is likely that in-donor refugee costs
will rise to unprecedented levels among DAC countries, especially those in Europe.
Recent estimates 39 suggest that total in-donor refugee costs will be above US$35 billion
in both 2022 and 2023, nearly three times the level in 2021. It will therefore become even
more important to go beyond the headline ODA figures to understand how much ODA is
reaching partner countries.
Lack of ‘intentionality’ in non-transfer ODA
Aside from being spent in donor countries, one aspect that unites most non-transfer aid is
that it is reactive and difficult to anticipate or prepare for in advance. With the exception of
administrative costs, this means that non-transfer aid is less likely to be subject to multi-
year programming. For example, although in-donor refugee costs will increase
substantially in 2022 and beyond, this is not as a result of an intentional policy on the part
of donors, but in response to events unfolding in Ukraine. Similarly, imputed student costs
depend on how many students arrive, which is at least partly beyond the control of
donors. This is less so for scholarships and promotion of development awareness, but
these categories are small in magnitude.
Therefore, as with spending in response to pandemics and humanitarian situations, these
types of spending are worthwhile, but fundamentally different from ODA that gets
transferred to recipient countries and can be used for longer-term development. To the
extent that they are counted under the same input targets as programmable aid, they
reduce the extent to which ODA is intentionally directed towards the goals of either
donors or recipients and increase the extent to which it is just a contingency fund,
reacting to events.
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty?
/ devinit.org
22Chapter 3. Allocation in
practice: what is spent,
where and how?
Bilateral ODA has a comparative advantage in places most in
need
The challenges that official development assistance (ODA) is being called on to address
are increasing faster than overall ODA volumes. It is likely that these trends will continue,
as both climate-related humanitarian emergencies and risks of future pandemics also
increase. 40 Historic trends in ODA suggest that it is unlikely to increase fast enough to
meet these needs. 41 It is therefore becoming more important that remaining ODA is well
targeted towards poverty reduction.
ODA – and grant financing in particular – has a comparative advantage in those places
where other sources of finance are hard to raise. In practice, this means poorer countries
and especially least developed countries (LDCs) with the large majority now experiencing
problems with loan financing due to a moderate risk of debt distress or worse. 42 In
addition, some sectors that are particularly important for poverty reduction (health,
education and other social services for example) are sectors in which generating a
financial return is comparatively difficult. ODA is thus particularly important in these
sectors.
Focusing on LDCs is a good proxy for focusing on poverty reduction. While some middle-
income countries such as Nigeria and India have high absolute numbers of people living
in extreme poverty, LDCs as a group have specific characteristics that make ODA
especially valuable. 43 LDCs are far less likely to receive other types of international
finance (such as foreign direct investment or remittances) and are generally far less able
to mobilise domestic resources. In 2019, domestic resources were only US$150 per
person on average in LDCs – just a third of the level in LMICs – making it harder for them
to finance key sectors such as health and education. Consequently, poverty is
increasingly concentrated in this group of countries. These characteristics are reflected in
the commitment of Development Assistance Committee (DAC) countries to spend at least
0.15% of gross national income (GNI) on aid to LDCs, 44 a target which has rarely been
met.
The necessity of focusing on LDCs will only increase, especially given the significant
crossover between LDCs and fragile and conflict-affected states. Governments are
currently discussing important reforms of the multilateral development bank (MDB)
system that will allow greater leverage of MDB balance sheets to unlock hundreds of
billions of additional development finance. However, this additional finance is likely to be
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty? / devinit.org
23directed towards middle-income countries: currently, only 16% of disbursements from
MDBs are to LDCs. Further, the additional finance raised will largely be in the form of
loans. Given that most LDCs are currently at ‘moderate’ or higher risk of debt distress, 45
there are question marks over the extent to which they can significantly scale up even
concessional borrowing.
While the reform efforts may not directly benefit LDCs, they nevertheless present an
opportunity. ODA’s comparative advantage in LDCs is likely to increase. LDCs are the
group most in need of grant (and highly concessional) financing and have the fewest
alternative financing options. The greater volume of finance unlocked by reform efforts
could open space to pivot ODA towards LDCs.
LDCs are experiencing a greater share of poverty, but a lower
share of bilateral aid
While the share of the world’s people living in extreme poverty in LDCs has risen from
35% in 2011 to 53% in 2021 and is estimated to increase to nearly 60% by 2025, bilateral
ODA has moved in the other direction. The share of bilateral aid given to LDCs has fallen
from 31% to 24% over the same period. Figure 7 shows what happens if these trends are
extrapolated to 2025. In absolute terms, bilateral aid stagnated, remaining at US$33
billion in both 2011 and 2021. This is despite international agreements to increase ODA
spending in LDCs: DAC countries have committed to spending 0.15–0.2% of their GNI on
aid to LDCs. 46 Between 2011 and 2021, DAC countries got further away from this goal,
with aid spent in LDCs falling from 0.10% to 0.09% of DAC GNI. 47 This figure includes
‘imputed multilateral spend’ – the share of core multilateral contributions that supports
disbursements in LDCs from multilateral organisations.
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty?
/ devinit.org
24Figure 7: People living in extreme poverty in LDCs, and ODA to LDCs, 2011, 2021
and 2025
2011
Share of people living in
extreme poverty in LDCs
DAC bilateral ODA to
LDCs % of total
35%
31%
2021
53%
24%
2025
57%
23%
Source: Development Initiatives based on OECD DAC and World Bank PovcalNet data.
Notes: LDC = least developed country; ODA = official development assistance; DAC = Development Assistance
Committee (OECD). Continuation of trend scenarios (average annual change) for ODA to LDCs % total over
both last three years and last ten years lead to 23% in 2025 DAC bilateral ODA to LDCs % of total. This was
based on following the trajectory of ODA to LDCs as a percentage of total bilateral ODA (including non-country
allocable). Applying three-year and ten-year average annual growth both resulted in the 23% value. Considering
ODA to LDCs as a share of country-allocable ODA from DAC donors, the trend is relatively stable, with ODA to
LDCs remaining at around 40% over the last decade. The range is from 37% to 45% but there is no downward
trend, and the 2010 value of 41% is close to the 2021 value of 40%.
Bilateral ODA to LDCs is heavily influenced by the trends discussed in Chapter 2. In
2011, there were significant debt cancellations for LDCs which led to higher non-transfer
ODA for this group. The increase in humanitarian spending in the last decade has been
concentrated in LDCs as well. However, when these are taken into account, the trend is
similar. When Covid-10, humanitarian assistance and non-transfer aid are excluded, the
share of bilateral aid to LDCs fell from 31% to 27% between 2011 and 2021. In absolute
terms, this means that aid for longer-term, strategic purposes fell from US$22.4 billion to
US$19.6 billion between 2011 and 2021, a fall of 13%. 48
Rising ‘non-country allocable’ distorts the picture
This picture is complicated by the rise over the last decade in aid that cannot be allocated
by country. This category was 80% higher in 2021 than in 2011, and now accounts for
33% of bilateral ODA when non-transfer aid is excluded. This category includes aid given
as core funding to NGOs, to special-purpose funds or to development finance institutions.
As much of this rise comes from contributions to humanitarian organisations and to Gavi,
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty?
/ devinit.org
25the Vaccine Alliance for the response to the Covid pandemic, the increase is only 30%
when humanitarian, Covid, and non-transfer aid are removed. By this measure, it
accounts for US$24 billion, or 33% of the remaining bilateral ODA (see Figure 8 below).
Figure 8: Bilateral ODA by income group (excluding humanitarian, Covid and non-
transfer aid), 2011–2021
30
Unallocated by
income
25
20
15
10
5
Unallocated by income
LMICs
LDCs
UMICs
0
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
Source: Development Initiatives based on OECD CRS.
Notes: ODA = official development assistance; LMIC = lower middle-income country; LDC = least developed
country; UMIC = upper middle-income country. Covid ODA is identified using purpose code 12264 and the
‘keyword’ variable. For convenience, the LDC category includes ‘other LICs’, and the UMICs category includes
a small amount of aid to ‘More advanced countries and territories (MADCCTs)’. This is a very small share of the
total in each case. ODA unallocated by income is that for which a specific recipient country cannot be identified,
for example, because it has been given to a special purpose fund which operates in numerous countries.
Ultimately, some of this aid will be spent in LDCs which could change the picture. It is not
clear whether this overstates or understates the decline in bilateral ODA to LDCs. While
non-allocable aid has increased, it is possible that the share ultimately spent in LDCs has
declined enough to offset this. It is difficult to assess the impact of the rise in non-
allocable aid because the quality of reporting on ODA channels of delivery is lacking with
information often only reported at an aggregate level or not at all. However, the available
evidence suggests that most of this ODA is linked to private-sector spending:
•
•
Around 32% of the increase in non-allocable aid is in the form of loans or equity. This
includes capital contributions to development finance institutions such as DEG and
Proparco.
Another 9% is from capital contributions to British International Investment and
NORFUND (the UK and Norway have counted such contributions as grants in the
Creditor Reporting System data).
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty?
/ devinit.org
26•
Another 10% of the increase was accounted for by contributions to International Bank
for Reconstruction and Development trust funds, the Development Bank of Latin
America and the International Finance Corporation. Given their mandates, the focus
of these organisations on LDCs is limited.
This analysis is highly incomplete and further research is necessary to provide a greater
understanding of which countries ultimately benefit from non-allocable aid and how.
Nevertheless, the data available here does indicate that over half of such aid is linked to
spending that very likely benefits middle-income countries.
Multilateral disbursements offset the decline in aid to LDCs, at
the expense of concessionality
The decline in bilateral aid to LDCs (both relative and in absolute terms) has been offset
by an increase in the share of ODA disbursements from multilateral donors to LDCs.
Whereas the share of bilateral ODA to LDCs declined by 4%, the share of multilateral
ODA disbursements to this group increased by 7%, from 35% to 42%. This resulted in an
absolute increase in ODA disbursements to LDCs of US$5 billion between 2011 and
2021 (when humanitarian, Covid and non-transfer aid are removed).
Although the change in multilateral ODA disbursements counteracted the bilateral shift
away from spending ODA in LDCs, this has come at a cost. Bilateral aid is far more likely
to be in the form of grant financing: between 2011 and 2021, 83% of bilateral aid was in
the form of grants, whereas the corresponding figure for multilaterals was 55%. The
increase in the relative importance of multilaterals for ODA disbursements to LDCs has
decreased the average concessionality of these disbursements. The share of grants in
total ODA disbursements to LDCs fell from 84% to 64% between 2011 and 2021. Grant
financing for LDCs from DAC countries and multilaterals fell over this period, from US$30
billion to US$26 billion (see Figure 9 below).
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty?
/ devinit.org
27Figure 9: ODA disbursements from DAC and multilaterals to LDCs by instrument
(excluding humanitarian, Covid and non-transfer), 2011–2021
50
45
40
35
12
11
6
7
8
10
13
19
14
10
15
30
Loans/equity
25
Grants
20
15
30
30
31
29 29 30 31
2014 2015 2016 2017
31
31
29
26
10
5
0
2011
2012
2013
2018
2019
2020
2021
Source: Development Initiatives based on OECD CRS.
Notes: ODA = official development assistance; DAC = Development Assistance Committee (OECD); LDC =
least developed country; LIC = low-income country; UMIC = upper middle-income country. Covid aid is identified
using purpose code 12264 and the ‘keyword’ variable. For convenience, the LDC category includes ‘other LICs’.
This is a very small share of the total.
This shift away from grants is not solely a result of a higher share of ODA disbursements
originating from multilaterals. The share of grants in total bilateral ODA to LDCs fell from
97% to 87% between 2011 and 2021, and from 96% to 82% when non-transfer, Covid
and humanitarian assistance are removed. However, multilaterals remain much less likely
to provide aid in the form of grants: in 2021, only 47% of multilateral aid to LDCs
(excluding Covid and humanitarian) was in the form of grants.
The shift away from grant financing is not unique to LDCs (all groups have seen a decline
in grant financing over the last decade) and concessional loans can be important tools for
development. At the same time, even highly concessional lending can add to debt
burdens in the countries of greatest poverty and may be less appropriate than grant
financing, especially given that the majority of LDCs are at risk of debt distress as noted
above. Countries that were in debt distress in 2023 recorded a decline in their share of
grant financing in development aid from DAC countries and multilaterals from 86% to
76% between 2011 and 2021. For countries that were at high risk of debt distress, the
decline was from 83% to 66%.
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty?
/ devinit.org
28Bilateral aid to pro-poor sectors in LDCs has stagnated
In addition, the sectoral focus of bilateral aid to LDCs shows a lack of progress in sectors
likely to benefit the poor disproportionately. Previous Development Initiatives research
has identified five sectors that disproportionately benefit those living in extreme poverty:
health, education, agriculture, water and sanitation, and other social services. 49 The latter
includes funding for social assistance programmes, which some have argued should
account for a much larger share of ODA. 50
Despite rising throughout the first part of the 2010s, bilateral aid to these sectors
(excluding non-transfer and Covid aid) was slightly lower in 2021 than in 2011 (US$9.4
billion compared to US$10.0 billion). This stands in stark contrast to previous years:
bilateral aid to pro-poor sectors in LDCs nearly doubled between 2006 and 2011. Since
then, apart from a surge in 2017, it has declined on average.
Largely, this was driven by bilateral aid to the health sector, which is by far the largest
pro-poor sector (see Figure 10 below). This type of aid grew consistently between 2006
and 2013 (from US$2.4 billion to US$5.4 billion) but has declined on average ever since
(despite peaking in 2017). Bilateral aid to the agricultural sector in LDCs followed a
similar pattern and aid to education was relatively flat between 2010 and 2019, declining
slightly thereafter. Bilateral aid to ‘other social services’ in LDCs bucked the trend, and
has increased consistently since 2014, but remains small (only US$0.8 billion in 2021).
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty?
/ devinit.org
29Figure 10: Bilateral ODA to pro-poor sectors in LDCs (excluding Covid and non-
transfer aid), 2010–2021
6
5
Health
4
3
2
Education
Agriculture
Water and sanitation
1
Other social services
Digitisation
0
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
Source: Development Initiatives based on OECD CRS.
Notes: ODA = official development assistance; LDC = least developed country; CRS = Creditor Reporting
System (OECD DAC). Spending on Covid has been identified in the CRS using both the purpose code 12264
and the ‘keyword’ variable. Estimates using this method do not match DAC1. See Annex 2 on methodology for
more information.
In contrast, multilateral ODA disbursements to pro-poor sectors in LDCs increased
consistently between 2006 and 2019, from around US$3.8 billion to US$11.3 billion.
Again, this was largely driven by the health sector and partly due to the establishment of
major vertical health funds such as the Global Fund and Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance.
However, multilateral ODA to other pro-poor sectors in LDCs also increased consistently
over this period.
Since 2019, multilateral ODA disbursements to the health sector have shown a
substantial decline when Covid-related disbursements are excluded. However, care
should be taken in interpreting this figure, given the way in which Covid-related spending
is identified. It is possible that some disbursements marked as such have more general
benefits, such as strengthening health systems. While this is also true of bilateral ODA,
the decline in bilateral aid to the health sector began in 2017 and so does not entirely
explain this trend.
The increase in multilateral ODA disbursements to pro-poor sectors counteracted the
decline in bilateral spending, meaning that total ODA disbursements to such sectors were
higher in 2021 than in 2011 (US$17.0 billion, compared to US$15.8 billion), albeit by only
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty?
/ devinit.org
307.9%. However, as with aid to LDCs as a whole, the reliance of DAC countries on
multilaterals to fill the gaps in their bilateral spending comes at the expense of
concessionality. Grant financing from DAC countries and multilaterals to pro-poor sectors
in LDCs declined by US$1 billion between 2011 and 2021. While this was partly because
the share of grants in bilateral aid to pro-poor sectors in LDCs decreased during this
period (from 99% to 92%), it was driven mainly by the increase in the share of
disbursements from multilaterals, which are more likely to be loans.
In summary, when the impact of special circumstances is taken into account, the amount
of bilateral aid spent in countries most in need has declined over the last decade. The aid
spent in those countries is less concessional, and less likely to go to sectors likely to
disproportionately benefit the poor. While multilateral organisations have increased their
focus on LDCs to counteract this trend, the higher share of loans in their ODA
disbursements has meant that grant financing for LDCs has still declined (when
humanitarian and Covid aid are excluded).
The fact that bilateral ODA is moving in the wrong direction – away from the countries
with greatest poverty, away from pro-poor sectors and away from grants where they are
needed most – suggests that we need a re-think. When the reactive elements of ODA are
removed, how do donors decide to allocate what is left, and how could this be improved?
In Chapter 4, we consider current aid allocation models and suggest moving towards
those that prioritise the poorest to a greater degree. Aid is partly political. But it is useful
to start with an idea of how aid should be spent if poverty eradication was the sole focus.
Other initiatives, such as MDB reform, the potential for greater uses of special drawing
rights, and greater private sector mobilisation, provide the opportunity to be more
targeted in how ODA is used, and to move towards an allocation model that puts people
living in poverty first.
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty?
/ devinit.org
31Chapter 4. Principles of
ODA allocation
This chapter calls for poverty reduction to be a key driver in the allocation of official
development assistance (ODA). We see from analysis and evidence presented in
previous chapters that this is currently not the case. Pandemic recovery efforts, rising
food insecurity, debt, inflation and the Ukraine crisis are all key challenges for the world
and international public investment plays a key role in all of them. While spending money
on combating Covid or helping Ukrainian refugees is undoubtedly good, ODA is charged
with addressing ever more issues, such as climate mitigation and rising in-donor refuge
costs. Unless ODA increases accordingly, traditional development priorities will lose out.
There is a trade-off if we count expenditure in more areas towards ODA targets. For
example, the estimated need for climate mitigation finance is hundreds of billions of
dollars (estimated at US$300 billion annually in Middle-Eastern and African countries,
most of which are ODA-eligible). ODA is not currently enough to meet this need and to
tackle poverty.
In this chapter we present a set of critical foundations and principles that can be
developed into a simple decision-making framework to drive more ODA investments
towards tackling poverty directly.
Existing allocation models do not prioritise people living in
greatest poverty
A review of donor allocation criteria, supported by a series of interviews undertaken for
this research, confirms that there are surprisingly few donor models that systematically
allocate aid portfolios across purposes or geographies. As such, they are often unable to
inform or legitimise allocations among competing objectives. Bilateral donors rarely have
specific frameworks or criteria that explicitly focus on ensuring that their policies
disproportionately benefit people living in greatest poverty, although some present a
broad, diverse set of criteria including weightings to certain categories such as gender, or
performance indicators that might indirectly benefit them, though not disproportionally.
Multilateral agencies more commonly use formulas to determine their allocations. GDP-
based eligibility thresholds are common primary starting points, together with formulas
dependent on specific agency mandates. Performance-based allocations also remain
central to many allocation decisions (see Annex 2 for details of the methodology used in
this analysis).
Donors face trade-offs that might conflict with a development cooperation policy that
targets the people in greatest poverty. The allocation of ODA is the outcome of complex
processes, politics, transactions and negotiations between donor and recipient, as well as
among donors. Our research found that donors are ultimately faced with difficult
decisions and have to balance multiple agendas and purposes such as:
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty? / devinit.org
32•
•
•
•
The need to demonstrate short-term returns for immediate and direct impact versus
long-term development need.
The focus on ring-fencing aid for specific micro-scale standalone interventions
compared to more macro-scale disbursements (budget support) to support systemic
change.
Performance-related allocations based on policy and institutional performance rather
than allocations based on need.
Tying ODA allocations to donors’ political, security, historical and economic motives,
which diverts focus away from pure humanitarian and development considerations.
This results in less autonomy for partner countries and leads to uncoordinated aid
practices.
We need a coherent allocation framework that prioritises the
people living in greatest poverty
Existing models do not lay out a clear allocation framework that prioritises the people
living in greatest poverty. The absence of a clear purpose for ODA means that it risks
becoming increasingly subject to the domestic whims of narrowly defined and incoherent
short-term donor priorities. With growing demands for ODA, and inconsistencies in how
aid is currently allocated, there is a clear need for robust logic that defines how ODA is
allocated, for whom and with what outcomes.
An explicit re-focus on poverty within a wider body of development finance would be
transformative. While this might look like the traditional purpose of ODA, current
allocations show that poverty reduction is not always at the centre of decision-making.
Framing the allocation criteria to prioritise the needs of those living in greatest poverty is
a radical agenda.
All ODA investments must be able to demonstrate who benefits and ensure that the
people living in greatest poverty are targeted at least equally, if not disproportionately
more. Development Initiatives has long advocated for accountable choices over the
allocation of aid to answer three questions: 51
•
•
Who will benefit, and are they living in poverty? Taking into account the scarce
nature of aid and its comparative advantage in poverty reduction, all ODA
investments must identity: (a) who specifically they are benefiting, and (b) whether
they are targeting the places where people are living in poverty, such as least
developed countries (LDCs).
What is the evidence on the probability of impact? Assessing the probability that
resources are going to deliver an impact for poverty reduction needs to take into
account the comparative advantage of ODA in reaching people living in poverty. ODA
investments need to consider: (a) what alternatives exist that could deliver the same
return on investment, and (b) why the proposed investment is a better choice.
Investment in global public goods (GPGs) is critical, and while the challenges in
measuring the probability of impact on those in poverty must be acknowledged,
global investments also need to be compared with other options and investments that
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty?
/ devinit.org
33•
will remain unfunded if aid is to deliver as much poverty reduction as possible for
every dollar. ODA investments need to consider what works for the people living in
greatest poverty, particularly in those areas shown to have disproportional benefits
for them.
When will the benefits be felt? The timeframe for returns on aid investments is
critical for individuals whose life choices are limited. To measure the benefits of one
intervention against another, ODA investments should consider the transformational
benefits for people living in poverty in both the short and long term. For instance, the
benefits of building a road to people living in greatest poverty may take years to have
an impact, whereas the effect of a cash transfer programme can be immediate.
Another important consideration is balancing in-country investments with GPGs, as
the latter may require longer timeframes.
Against this backdrop, in this report we propose components of an allocation framework
that prioritises the people living in greatest poverty. Decisions on allocation of ODA
should:
•
•
Target the people and places with greatest poverty
Focus on sectors and investments that disproportionately benefit people living in the
greatest poverty.
Targeting the people and places with the greatest poverty
ODA investments should go to countries that need it most. There is a general consensus
that the needs of lower-income countries should not be measured only in terms of
income, because that masks major underlying development challenges. 52 The
international community has long considered and developed alternative measures that go
beyond income, such as the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) Human
Development Index (HDI) of 1997, 53 and the Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI),
developed by the Oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative (OPHI) and the
UNDP in 2010. Sustainable Development Goal Target 17.19 calls on countries “to
develop measurements of progress on sustainable development that complement GDP
[gross domestic product]”, and Target 1.2 calls for nationally developed measures of
multidimensional poverty. 54 However, many donors (particularly multilateral organisations)
still use GDP-per-capita metrics as a starting point for allocation decisions, with only a
few bilateral donors interviewed for this research saying they developed their own
multidimensional measurements.
Countries’ income groupings are much less relevant because many and diverse countries
now sit within the same category. This system does not adequately reflect the needs of
an agenda that seeks to support the people living in greatest poverty. Furthermore,
poverty and vulnerability to environmental and political risks in many countries are a
subnational phenomenon (with more diversity within than between income groups, which
aggregate country measures cannot capture). There are further limitations to using a
country’s GDP per capita. For example, it is not helpful in choosing between types of aid,
such as investing in country needs or GPGs.
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty?
/ devinit.org
34Targeting the poorest and most vulnerable people is important because these people do
not meet the preconditions for benefiting from untargeted development cooperation
projects. Lack of human, social, economic and physical assets on the one hand, and
exclusion on the other, prevent them from participating in many types of development
cooperation projects. 55
Poverty-targeting practices have been successful in achieving the allocation of more
investments to the poorest countries and to the people living in greatest poverty. Previous
Development Initiatives research 56 found that donors with a stronger mandate for
reducing poverty target their resources more effectively. When assessing 63 donor
agencies accounting for 90% of ODA disbursements, those with a legally grounded
mandate for allocating resources with reference to poverty reduction allocated almost
twice as many of their resources to countries with higher poverty rates than those
agencies for which poverty reduction was not an explicit goal. At the programming level,
targeting has also proven effective in those living in greatest poverty who lack the assets
to benefit from broader economic growth and development projects. Targeting indigenous
people proved effective in securing their land rights, 57 targeted rural roads projects have
improved connections between the poorest villages, 58 and targeted agriculture projects in
areas such as research and development or infrastructure have increased integration
between those living in greatest poverty in agricultural production, 59 to mention a few
examples.
Focus on sectors and investments that disproportionately benefit people
living in the greatest poverty
Significant public investment in human-capital sectors and agriculture is critical to poverty
reduction. The level of importance ascribed to different sectors in terms of getting people
out of poverty has changed over time. However, after conducting an extensive literature
review identifying evidence of sectors that disproportionally benefit people living in
greatest poverty, we conclude that investments should support the strengthening of the
social sectors (health, education and social protection) and agriculture. 60 Within these
sectors, evidence shows that investment in some areas, such as primary education or
basic health care, have had demonstrable impacts on the people living in greatest
poverty.
Investing ODA in human-capital sectors and agriculture strengthens the resilience of
people living in poverty and has long been recognised as critical for ‘pro-poor’
development. However, there are two relatively ‘recent’ challenges that disproportionately
affect the resilience of the people living in greatest poverty: climate change and lack of
access to digitalisation. Climate change adaptation demands serious attention because it
threatens the health, food security, access to water and incomes of people depending
heavily on agriculture. The ‘digital divide’ in lower-income countries has manifested as a
discrepancy in the use of digital technologies (due to lack of availability of basic
infrastructure, access and affordability), the benefits obtained from digital technologies,
and the level of citizens’ digital skills. 61 It has never been more important to invest in
these sectors – while considering the intersections with gender – to enable equitable
recovery from the pandemic and to develop resilience to future shocks. 62
ODA targeted to these sectors has a comparative advantage in reaching the people living
in greatest poverty and does not crowd out other effective forms of finance. Domestic
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty?
/ devinit.org
35public finance is the major development source for the social sectors, but the revenue
bases and tax-collection capacity of lower-income countries, particularly LDCs, is very
limited. Private sector financing for health and education is gaining some attention.
However, the amounts of finance are still small due to the lack of incentives and inherent
risk of operating in these sectors. There is also still much to learn about the role of the
private sector in supporting the poorest and most vulnerable people and the extent to
which investments specifically target this group.
While agriculture and rural development rely heavily on private funding, the public sector
has a key role to play. This consists of providing both investment and policy support to
tackle persistent market failures such as the under-provision of public goods and negative
externalities (such as adaptation to climate change). The public sector should also
address the lack of protection for the poorest and most vulnerable people through, for
instance, social protection. Similarly, digitalisation is mostly financed by government
entities and the private sector. However, public investment and ODA in particular fills an
important gap where the private sector lacks incentives to intervene, such as in
countering the digital divide. ODA is thus a critical public international resource that can
help governments achieve sectoral development objectives that feed into wider national
objectives, such as poverty reduction and sustainable development.
On the demand side, governments in lower-income countries also expect ODA
investments to help narrow the gaps in finance in sectors and areas with perceived lower
returns on investment. Governments of low-income countries do not consider the social
sectors to be generating enough revenue to service loans (domestic and international).
Consequently, there is a preference for funding through ODA-like flows such as grants
and highly concessional loans, in addition to domestic resources. 63 Furthermore, given
the pressure on public budgets due to the Covid-19 pandemic response, ODA-like flows
have the potential to be flexible and adaptable to the pressing and short-term needs of
governments – particularly in tackling urgent investment in the sectors that
disproportionally benefit people living in poverty.
Many of these sectors remain central to an equitable pandemic-recovery agenda that
strengthens the resilience of the people living in greatest poverty. Differential needs
between regions, countries and at subnational levels necessitate flexibility to respond to
context. Therefore, a rigid prescription of an exclusive set of sectors is unhelpful.
Likewise, donors have different sectors and geographies of expertise, which require
considerations of labour division and how overall collective effort responds to need.
However, certain approaches in sectors identified here represent areas where evidence
of direct poverty impact is already strong and should constitute significant proportions of
aid portfolios. Furthermore, every approach must be intersected by gendered inequities,
age and other identities of marginalisation.
Within these sectors, there are specific areas that disproportionally benefit people living in
greatest poverty.
•
The pandemic has exemplified the importance of public investment in human capital
sectors: primary education, basic health care and social protection.
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty?
/ devinit.org
36•
•
•
More than other economic sectors, growth in agriculture benefits people living in
greatest poverty. To reach these people, agricultural investment should prioritise the
assetless.
Disasters related to climate change can set people and societies back for decades.
The people living in greatest poverty must be equipped with the right tools to adapt to
the consequences of climate change.
The digital divide exacerbates inequality between ‘haves’ and ‘have-nots’. The
opportunities of digitalisation must be accessible to everyone.
An appropriate balance is needed within donor portfolios individually and collectively,
between investments in the core areas that benefit the people living in greatest poverty,
and in wider sectors that are highly relevant in particular contexts. While this paper does
not go as far as to propose minimum quantitative proportions of ODA budgets, this merits
further investigation.
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty?
/ devinit.org
37Conclusion
Official development assistance (ODA) is facing unparalleled pressures from
growing, competing demands, including humanitarian and crisis response, in-country
programming, investment in global public goods such as tackling climate change,
institutional strengthening and leveraging of other finance sources.
Trade-offs do exist: genuine 'win–wins' are rare and the optimisation of aid allocation is
different for each priority. Addressing climate mitigation, for example, generally involves a
focus different from that of targeting poverty.
Unpacking ODA spending and worrying about ODA rules still matters: it is not
enough to look at global trends in ODA. We need to assess development aid in detail to
understand what ODA is made of and what is being spent where and thus judge its
effectiveness. Furthermore, ODA rules do matter as they raise additionality questions
critical to understanding how much money remains to invest in the countries most in
need.
ODA is a rare international public good. It must be demand-driven to focus on what it
does best and where it is most needed to maximise its comparative advantage. By
targeting the people living in greatest poverty who are increasingly concentrated in
certain places and communities, ODA can work to ensure that everyone benefits from
these wider investments and processes. Furthermore, ODA investments should be
targeted to sectors: (a) where considerable evidence already exists that they
disproportionately benefit people living in greatest poverty and are the most effective
types of interventions for these sectors, and (b) where ODA has a comparative
advantage over other forms of finance and does not crowd out the growth of other
sources of investment.
The aggregate global picture does not tell the full story. While there is a critical need
to debate the role of ODA in the context of recent global challenges, we need to unpack
ODA spending at the country level to understand how it works in practice. At the same
time, it is crucial to embed the perspectives of countries receiving aid in future ODA
discourses and narratives.
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty? / devinit.org
38Annex 1. Comparative
advantages of different
resources for ending
poverty
Type of flow Resource Objective Channels to impact the poorest people
Official ODA (DAC
providers) Welfare and
development Numerous, including: improved service
provision; strengthened public sector;
support to economic sectors;
humanitarian response to crises
Poverty reduction
Mutual interest
Other providers of
development
cooperation Development and
poverty reduction
Other official flows Economic development
Mutual interest
Mutual interest
Other official debt
Numerous, including: improved service
provision; economic development
Economic development
Finance for private sector development;
indirect job creation
Indirect job creation
Strategic interests
Commercial
Peacekeeping Peace and security Enhanced security
Military and security Peace and security Enhanced security; indirect job creation,
economic development
Foreign direct
investment Return on investment Job creation; payment of taxes; multiplier
effects within local economy
Portfolio equity Return on investment Indirect economic development; job
creation
Commercial debt Commercial returns Finance for private sector development;
indirect job creation
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty? / devinit.org
39Private
Private
development
assistance
Poverty reduction
Humanitarian
Numerous, including: improved access to
basic services; humanitarian response to
crises
Solidarity
Remittances
Support for family and
friends Increased household income for
recipients;
Small-scale private
investment investments in human capital and
enterprise;
safety net in times of crisis
Source: Development Initiatives, 2015. Investments to end poverty. Available at:
https://devinit.org/resources/investments-to-end-poverty-2015/
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty?
/ devinit.org
40Annex 2. Methodology
This report includes a mixture of primary and secondary research using quantitative and
qualitative data sources and information. Most quantitative data used in this report is from
the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) Creditor
Reporting System (CRS) or OECD Development Assistance Committee (DAC) Table 1.
Unless otherwise stated, the following points apply to data in this report.
•
•
•
All figures are in US$, constant 2020 prices.
All figures for official development assistance (ODA) are gross disbursements.
Whereas the OECD reports headline ODA figures in grant-equivalent terms, this data
extends back to only 2015, and is subject to numerous controversies around how it is
measured.
We primarily focus on members of the DAC, given the shared rules for measuring aid
agreed by this group and the complete data coverage (compared to non-DAC
countries for example, for which data is incomplete).
For the qualitative part of this research, we selected a number of bilateral and multilateral
organisations based on several criteria, including largest donors and availability of ODA-
allocation documentation. Available literature, including donors’ strategy documents,
eligibility policies, funding models and criteria and DAC peer reviews, was reviewed from
27 bilateral and multilateral donor agencies to provide an understanding of what these
agencies consider when allocating resources.
The final list of organisations includes:
•
•
Bilateral donors: Ireland, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Sweden, France, Norway,
USA, UK, Japan and Canada
Multilateral organisations: African Development Bank (AfDB), Agence Française de
Développement (AFD), UK Development Finance Institution (CDC), Development
Cooperation Fund (DFC), European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
(EBRD), EU, Dutch entrepreneurial development bank (FMO), Gavi the Vaccine
Alliance (GAVI), Green Climate Fund (GCF), Global Fund, Global Partnership for
Education (GPE), United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF),
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF), World Food Programme (WFP) and World Bank.
Key informant interviews were conducted with several of these organisations at different
stages of this research in order to: (a) explore the research questions, (b) triangulate
information and fill in the gaps of the scoping work, and (c) test the framing and working
of the framework presented in this report. Further, hypotheses and findings from this
research were discussed and tested with several of DI’s networks and presented publicly
on different occasions.
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty?
/ devinit.org
41Annex 3. Spending on non-
transfer ODA by G7
countries
Non-transfer aid is official development assistance (ODA) that does not reach partner
countries. Examples are ODA spent on administration costs and on in-donor refugee
costs. While most countries recorded significantly increased in-donor refugee costs in the
mid-2010s for example, there are also major differences in the non-transfer categories on
which donors spend ODA. This annex examines recent trends in G7 countries, which
together accounted for 78% of ODA in 2021.
Canada
Canada’s expenditure on non-transfer ODA was 16% between 2011 and 2021, slightly
higher than the G7 average of 14%. Around half of this expenditure was on in-donor
refugee costs, which, as with most countries, was the largest non-transfer category. The
second-largest category was administrative costs: Canada consistently spent the second-
highest share of ODA on this category, behind the US. Over the last decade, it accounted
for 5% of total ODA. Canada had the smallest variation in share spent on non-transfer
ODA over the last decade, varying between 13% and 18% but showing no consistent
trend. By contrast, Canada’s transfer ODA consistently fell as a share of gross national
income (GNI) in the first years of the last decade (until 2014) but then rose back to
around its 2011 level (from 0.27% of GNI in 2011 to 0.28% in 2021).
France
France spent 15% of total ODA on non-transfer categories between 2011 and 2021,
which was roughly equal to the average among G7 countries (but higher than the
Development Assistance Committee (DAC) average of 14%). While a significant share of
this was accounted for by in-donor refugee costs (5% of ODA), unlike most DAC
countries, France’s largest non-transfer category over this period was imputed student
costs (5.6%). Among the G7 countries, France spent the most on this category between
2011 and 2021, although the share of ODA spent on this category has declined steadily
since 2013. Similarly, France spent a considerable amount of ODA on debt relief early in
the decade, averaging 9% between 2011 and 2013, but this declined to zero in 2021.
Consequently, France’s spending on non-transfer ODA fell from 23% of ODA in 2011 to
15% in 2021. France recorded an increase in transfer ODA of 59% over the same period.
Germany
Germany spent the second-largest amount on non-transfer ODA among the G7 between
2011 and 2021, at 21%. Over half of this spending was on in-donor refugee costs, which
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty?
/ devinit.org
42reached 25% of ODA in 2016. Following the German Chancellor’s ‘Wir Schaffen Das’
speech at the time, Germany became a key destination for refugees arriving in Europe.
Therefore, while in 2016 Germany accounted for 42% of total in-donor refugee costs
among DAC countries, it also accounted for 45% of total asylum applications in the same
countries. Since then, the share of ODA spent on this category has declined. However,
Germany also spends considerably more than most countries on imputed student costs
(totalling 5% of ODA between 2011 and 2021, more than any other G7 country but
France). Despite the growth in Germany’s non-transfer ODA, it also sharply increased its
transfer ODA, which more than doubled over the last decade (from US$12.9 billion to
US$28.1 billion, or from 0.37% to 0.69% of GNI). Even between 2014 and 2016, when its
non-transfer ODA tripled, Germany simultaneously increased its expenditure on transfer
ODA.
Italy
Among the G7, Italy has spent the largest share of ODA on non-transfer categories over
the last decade, at 23%. Most of this was from in-donor refugee costs, which peaked at
32% of ODA in 2016, and accounted for 18% of ODA between 2011 and 2021. Given its
location on the Mediterranean, Italy was one of the main arrival points for refugees
attempting to reach Europe. France, Germany and the US are the only countries to have
received more asylum applications since 2014, but given that they have much larger ODA
programmes, Italy’s expenditure led to a greater share of in-donor refugee costs in ODA.
However, Italy consistently increased its expenditure on transfer ODA throughout the
decade, which rose from US$2.9 billion to US$5 billion between 2011 and 2021, or from
0.15% to 0.25% of GNI.
Japan
Japan had the second-lowest share of non-transfer ODA over the last decade among G7
countries, at 7.5%, and the lowest share each year since 2015. Trends in Japan’s non-
transfer ODA are notably different from other G7 or DAC countries. It has recorded
essentially no in-donor refugee costs (only US$7 million in total since the category was
introduced in 1988, and only US$4 million in 2011–2021). However, Japan is a country
that primarily provides ODA in the form of loans, and it occasionally records ODA on relief
of such loans, although this counts only towards gross ODA. Debt relief therefore
accounted for 34% of Japan’s non-transfer ODA between 2011 and 2021, or 2.5% of total
ODA. The largest category of non-transfer ODA for Japan is administrative costs (3.8% of
ODA between 2011 and 2021), but this is nevertheless below the average for both the
DAC and G7.
United Kingdom
Between 2011 and 2021, the UK had the lowest share of non-transfer ODA among the
G7, at 7.4%. However, it has also seen the largest growth in non-transfer ODA over this
period, from US$679 million to US$2.4 billion. Therefore, by 2021 its share of ODA spent
on non-transfer categories was above the G7 average (at 16%, compared to 15%). Two
categories account for around 90% of the UK’s non-transfer ODA, administrative costs
and in-donor refugee costs, and each increased significantly between 2011 and 2021.
Over this time, in-donor refugee costs grew from 0.2% to 9% of total ODA, with a sharp
increase in 2020 and 2021 owing largely to the cost of providing emergency
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty?
/ devinit.org
43accommodation to asylum-seekers during the Covid pandemic. Administrative costs also
approximately doubled over the period, from 3.2% to 6.1%. The UK was the only G7
country to record a decline in transfer ODA between 2011 and 2021, of 2%.
United States
The US spent 12% of its total ODA on non-transfer categories between 2011 and 2021,
which was below the G7 average of 15%. However, the share of ODA spent on non-
transfer was much higher at the end of the decade than at the beginning: between 2011
and 2021 the share increased from 13% to 17%. Most of this increase happened in 2021,
when the US tripled its expenditure on in-donor refugee costs (from US$1.5 billion to
US$4.6 billion), which meant that it spent the largest share of ODA on in-donor refugee
costs among the G7 in that year. The US saw the smallest increase in transfer ODA over
this period (other than the UK which recorded a decline). However, as with non-transfer
ODA, this increase all came in 2021; transfer ODA in 2020 was slightly lower than in
2011. Therefore, the increases in transfer and non-transfer ODA coincided.
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty?
/ devinit.org
44Notes
1
The latter resulted in an expansion of instruments, to catalyse private investments largely in countries other
than low-income countries and in sectors promoting economic infrastructure, which generate higher returns than
human capital investments but have less evidence on how they impact poverty. See more in: Development
Initiatives, 2019. How blended finance reaches the poorest people. Available at:
www.devinit.org/resources/blended-finance-poorest-people/; Eurodad, 2017. Mixed messages: the rhetoric and
reality of using blended finance to leave no one behind. Available at: www.eurodad.org/blended-finance-briefing;
ODI, 2019. Blended finance in the poorest countries: the need for a better approach. Available at:
https://odi.org/en/publications/blended-finance-in-the-poorest-countries-the-need-for-a-better-approach/
2
Development Initiatives, 2013. Investments to end poverty. www.devinit.org/resources/investments-to-end-
poverty/; Development Initiatives, 2015. Investments to end poverty 2015. Available at:
https://devinit.org/resources/investments-to-end-poverty-2015/; Development Initiatives, 2018. Investments to
end poverty 2018. Available at: https://devinit.org/resources/investments-end-poverty-2018/
3
Total Official Support for Sustainable Development (TOSSD), 2020. International Task Force. Available at:
www.tossd.org/task-force/
4
Development Initiatives, 2019. Investments to end poverty 2018. Chapter 3: Mobilising all resources to leave
no one behind. Available at: www.devinit.org/resources/investments-end-poverty-2018/mobilising-all-resources-
leave-no-one-behind/
5
Bhattacharya, A. et al., 2022. Financing a big investment push in emerging markets and developing countries
for sustainable, resilient and inclusive recovery and growth, LSE. Available at:
www.lse.ac.uk/granthaminstitute/publication/financing-a-big-investment-push-in-emerging-markets-and-
developing-economies/
6
Development Initiatives, 2018. Investments to end poverty 2018. Available at:
https://devinit.org/resources/investments-end-poverty-2018/
7
The DAC list of ODA recipients. Available at: https://www.oecd.org/dac/financing-sustainable-
development/development-finance-standards/daclist.htm
8
Hand et al., 2022. GIINsight: sizing the impact investing market 2022. Global Impact Investing Network.
Available at: https://thegiin.org/research/publication/impact-investing-market-size-2022/
9
International Monetary Fund, February 2023. List of LIC DSAs for PRGT-eligible countries. Available at:
www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/dsa/dsalist.pdf
10
Bhattacharya, A. et al., 2022. Financing a big investment push in emerging markets and developing countries
for sustainable, resilient and inclusive recovery and growth, LSE. Available at:
www.lse.ac.uk/granthaminstitute/publication/financing-a-big-investment-push-in-emerging-markets-and-
developing-economies/
11
Development Initiatives, 2023. Scenarios for a 1% GNI external public finance target. Available at:
https://devinit.org/resources/one-percent-gni-external-public-finance-target-scenarios/
12
To achieve the Sustainable Development Goals, any additional financing must be invested appropriately, in
projects that can generate economic and social returns. Carter argues that the current lack of public
infrastructure does not necessarily imply the existence of opportunities to make such investments, explaining
why some organisations such as the Green Climate Fund have struggled to spend resources available to them.
Carter, 2023. Financing gap? What financing gap?, British International Investment. Available at:
www.bii.co.uk/en/news-insight/research/financing-gap-what-financing-gap/
13
Bhattacharya, A. et al., 2022. Financing a big investment push in emerging markets and developing countries
for sustainable, resilient and inclusive recovery and growth, LSE. Available at:
www.lse.ac.uk/granthaminstitute/publication/financing-a-big-investment-push-in-emerging-markets-and-
developing-economies/
14
Bhattacharya et al. estimate total expenditure on SDGs in 2019 in emerging developing economies (excluding
China), and then calculate the additional finance need to meet the SDGs by 2025 and 2030 respectively. For
2025, they suggest a breakdown of how the finance gap would be filled by sources of finance (DRM, private,
ODA, multilateral non-concessional and bilateral non-concessional) (Bhattacharya, A. et al., 2022. Financing a
big investment push in emerging markets and developing countries for sustainable, resilient and inclusive
recovery and growth, LSE. Available at: www.lse.ac.uk/granthaminstitute/publication/financing-a-big-investment-
push-in-emerging-markets-and-developing-economies/). Using CRS data and figures quoted in the text in
Bhattacharya et al., DI calculates estimates for the breakdown of spending on SDGs in 2019 by source of
finance (this was not provided in the paper). Then, DI also applies Bhattacharya et al.'s suggested percentage
breakdown to the 2030 figures. In addition, DI estimates what DAC GNI will be in 2025 and 2030 using IMF
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty?
/ devinit.org
45forecasts from the World Economic Outlook.
15
Cattaneo et al., 2021. Financing the transition to sustainable development in Least Developed Countries
(LDCs): challenges and opportunities, OECD Development Cooperation Directorate. Available at:
www.un.org/ldc5/sites/www.un.org.ldc5/files/dcd202117.en_.pdf#page=6
16
Kharas and MacArthur, 2019. Building the SDG economy: needs, spending, and financing for universal
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals, Brookings. Available at:
www.brookings.edu/research/building-the-sdg-economy-needs-spending-and-financing-for-universal-
achievement-of-the-sustainable-development-goals/
17
Devine et al., 2021. Private finance for development: wishful thinking or thinking out of the box?, IMF
Departmental Papers. Available at: www.imf.org/en/Publications/Departmental-Papers-Policy-
Papers/Issues/2021/05/14/Private-Finance-for-Development-50157
18
World Bank Data, ‘Military expenditure (% of general government expenditure)’, ID: MS.MIL.XPND.ZS.
Available at: https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/MS.MIL.XPND.ZS
19
See for example Manuel, 2023. Financing social assistance in lower income countries post Covid-19, ODI.
Available at: https://odi.org/en/publications/financing-social-assistance-in-lower-income-countries-post-covid-19-
an-exploration-of-realistic-options/
20
For example, changing the financing mix (raising more tax revenue and attracting greater private investment)
could be seen as key goals. For further discussion on caveats, see Development Initiatives, 2023. Scenarios for
a 1% GNI external public finance target. Available at: https://devinit.org/resources/one-percent-gni-external-
public-finance-target-scenarios/
21
Kharas and MacArthur, 2019. Building the SDG economy: needs, spending, and financing for universal
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals, Brookings. Available at:
www.brookings.edu/research/building-the-sdg-economy-needs-spending-and-financing-for-universal-
achievement-of-the-sustainable-development-goals/
22
Bhattacharya, A. et al., 2022. Financing a big investment push in emerging markets and developing countries
for sustainable, resilient and inclusive recovery and growth, LSE. Available at:
www.lse.ac.uk/granthaminstitute/publication/financing-a-big-investment-push-in-emerging-markets-and-
developing-economies/
23
Manuel, 2023. Financing social assistance in lower income countries post Covid-19, ODI. Available at:
https://odi.org/en/publications/financing-social-assistance-in-lower-income-countries-post-covid-19-an-
exploration-of-realistic-options/
24
For more information on recent trends in ODA disbursements, see the DI factsheet:
https://devinit.org/resources/aid-2021-official-development-assistance-key-facts/?nav=more-
about#:~:text=Key%20facts%20about%20ODA%20in%202021&text=Although%20DAC%20donors%20increas
ed%20gross,were%20lower%20than%20in%202020. This factsheet differed slightly in methodology, in that it
examined outflows from multilaterals rather than core contributions to multilaterals from DAC countries.
25
Development Initiatives, 2022. Global Humanitarian Assistance Report 2022. Available at:
https://devinit.org/resources/global-humanitarian-assistance-report-2022/
26
See for example Kenny, 2021. Don’t take cash from the poorest countries to ‘help’ them deal with climate
change, CGD. Available at: www.cgdev.org/blog/dont-take-cash-poorest-countries-help-them-deal-climate-
change
27
Development Initiatives, 2023. Scenarios for a 1% GNI external public finance target. Available at:
https://devinit.org/resources/one-percent-gni-external-public-finance-target-scenarios/
28
Melonio at al., 2022l. Official development assistance at the age of consequences, Agence Francaise De
Developpement. Available at: www.afd.fr/en/official-development-assistance-age-of-consequences-melonio-
naudet-
rioux#:~:text=Official%20Development%20Assistance%20(ODA)%20was,%E2%80%9D%20and%20the%20%
E2%80%9CSouth%E2%80%9D.
29
See for example Nordhaus et al., 2022. The obvious climate strategy nobody will talk about, Foreign Policy.
Available at: https://foreignpolicy.com/2022/11/06/climate-cop27-emissions-adaptation-development-energy-
africa-developing-countries-global-south/
30
This is using the ‘keyword’ variable in the Creditor Reporting System, along with purpose code 12264.
31
Development Initiatives, 2023. Global regional and national trends in economic poverty (data tool). Available
at: https://devinit.org/resources/global-regional-national-trends-in-economic-poverty/
32
Kenny, 2023. Blog: Is the DAC still fit for purpose?, Center for Global Development. Available at:
www.cgdev.org/blog/dac-still-fit-purpose
33
DI analysis of data underlying McCollum et al, 2018. Energy investment needs for fulfilling the Paris
Agreement and achieving the Sustainable Development Goals. Nature Energy. Available at:
https://www.nature.com/articles/s41560-018-0179-z#Sec20
34
OECD DAC External Development Finance Statistics, Imputed multilateral shares. Available at:
www.oecd.org/dac/financing-sustainable-development/development-finance-topics/climate-change.htm
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty?
/ devinit.org
4635
See for example Thwaites, 2022. Is the EU a payer, player, or just full of hot air? AidWatch 2022, CONCORD.
Available at: https://aidwatch.concordeurope.org/
36
Development Initiatives (Euan Ritchie), 2022. Blog: Why we should target country-programmable aid instead
of ODA. Available at: https://devinit.org/blog/target-country-programmable-aid-instead-oda/
37
Korea has since overtaken Canada.
38
Development Initiatives (Euan Ritchie), 2023. Blog: Spiralling emergency accommodation costs from the UK’s
Home Office are diverting aid from the world’s poorest. Available at: https://devinit.org/blog/emergency-
accommodation-costs-uk-home-office-diverting-aid/
39
Harcourt et al., 2022, updated 2023. Ukraine ODA Tracker, ONE Campaign. Available at:
https://data.one.org/data-dives/ukraine-oda-tracker/#:~:text=the%20previous%20year).-
,Our%20analysis%20shows%20that%20global%20in-
donor%20refugee%20costs%20alone,total%20ODA%20spent%20in%202021.
40
Joi, 2022. New study suggests risk of extreme pandemics like Covid-19 could increase threefold in coming
decades, GAVI. Available at: www.gavi.org/vaccineswork/new-study-suggests-risk-extreme-pandemics-covid-
19-could-increase-threefold-coming
41
Ritchie and Kenny, Center for Global Development, 2021. Blog: If we’re going to fund climate mitigation from
ODA, we need to double it. Available at: www.cgdev.org/blog/if-were-going-fund-climate-mitigation-oda-we-
need-double-it
42
International Monetary Fund, February 2023. List of LIC DSAs for PRGT-Eligible Countries. Available at:
www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/dsa/dsalist.pdf
43
See for example Development Initiatives, 2021. Reversing the trends that leave LDCs behind: how ODA can
be targeted to the needs of people living in greatest poverty post-pandemic. Available at:
https://devinit.org/resources/reversing-trends-leave-ldcs-behind/
44
See for example the United Nations ‘Inter-agency task force on financing for development’ page on official
development assistance, available at: https://developmentfinance.un.org/official-development-assistance
45
International Monetary Fund, February 2023. List of LIC DSAs for PRGT-Eligible Countries. Available at:
www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/dsa/dsalist.pdf
46
See for example the United Nations ‘Inter-agency task force on financing for development’ page on official
development assistance, available at: https://developmentfinance.un.org/official-development-assistance
47
This figure includes ‘imputed multilateral spend’ – the share of core multilateral contributions that supports
disbursements in LDCs from multilateral organisations.
48
We do not exclude climate finance from this analysis, given the uncertainties of how the Rio markers are
used.
49
This research also included digitalisation, which we have omitted here given that its value was very small.
50
Manuel, 2023. Financing social assistance in lower income countries post Covid-19, ODI. Available at:
https://odi.org/en/publications/financing-social-assistance-in-lower-income-countries-post-covid-19-an-
exploration-of-realistic-options/
51
Development Initiatives, 2013. Investments to end poverty 2013. Available at:
www.devinit.org/resources/investments-to-end-poverty/
52
UN, 2017. Economic and Social Council session. Poverty cannot be measured by income alone, participants
tell Economic and Social Council as 2017 integration segment opens. Available at:
www.un.org/press/en/2017/ecosoc6828.doc.htm; OECD, 2013. Identification and monitoring of potentially
under-aided countries. Available at: www.oecd.org/dac/aid-
architecture/Identification%20and%20Monitoring%20of%20Potentially%20Under-Aided%20Countries.pdf; Sida,
2018. Poverty Toolbox. Available at:
https://publikationer.sida.se/contentassets/90754846017c4afe830dc697331bd338/poverty_toolbox_extern_mar
s-2018.pdf; UNDP, 2015. Multidimensional poverty and its assessment found their place in the 2030 Agenda.
Available at: http://hdr.undp.org/en/content/multidimensional-poverty-and-its-assessment-found-their-place-
2030-agenda
53
UNDP. Human Development Index (HDI). Available at: http://hdr.undp.org/en/content/human-development-
index-hdi
54
UNSTATS. SDG indicators, metadata repository. Available at: https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/metadata/
55
Asian Development Bank, 2005. Assessing the impact of transport and energy infrastructure on poverty
reduction. Available at: www.adb.org/publications/assessing-impact-transport-and-energy-infrastructure-poverty-
reduction; Food and Agriculture Organization, 2018. Ending extreme poverty in rural areas. Available at:
www.fao.org/reduce-rural-poverty/resources/resources-detail/en/c/1157795/
56
Development Initiatives, 2015. Investments to end poverty 2015. Available at:
https://devinit.org/resources/investments-to-end-poverty-2015/
57
World Bank, 2018. Inclusive growth: a synthesis of findings from recent IEG evaluations. Available at:
https://ieg.worldbankgroup.org/evaluations/inclusive-growth
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty?
/ devinit.org
4758
International Food Policy Research Institute, 1999. Linkages between government spending, growth and
poverty in rural India. Available at: www.ifpri.org/publication/linkages-between-government-spending-growth-
and-poverty-rural-india-0; Columbia University and the World Bank, 2002. Do rural infrastructure investments
benefit the poor? Available at: http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/970321468760769535/Do-rural-
infrastructure-investments-benefit-the-poor-Evaluating-linkages-a-global-view-a-focus-on-Vietnam
59
International Fund for Agricultural Development, 2019. Technical Innovations for Rural Poverty Reduction.
Available at: www.ifad.org/en/web/ioe/evaluation/asset/41435871; World Bank, 2016. Grow, invest, insure: a
game plan to end extreme poverty by 2030. Available at:
https://documents.worldbank.org/en/publication/documents-
reports/documentdetail/924111479240600559/grow-invest-insure-a-game-plan-to-end-extreme-poverty-by-2030
60
World Bank, 2016. Grow, invest, insure: a game plan to end extreme poverty by 2030. Available at:
https://documents.worldbank.org/en/publication/documents-
reports/documentdetail/924111479240600559/grow-invest-insure-a-game-plan-to-end-extreme-poverty-by-
2030; Overseas Development Institute, 2020. Financing the reduction of extreme poverty post-Covid-19.
Available at: https://odi.org/en/publications/financing-the-reduction-of-extreme-poverty-post-covid-19/
61
OFSE Austrian Foundation for Development Research, 2018. Digitalization and Development Cooperation:
an assessment of the debate and its implications for policy. Available at:
www.oefse.at/fileadmin/content/Downloads/Publikationen/Briefingpaper/BP19-Digitalization-and-
Development.pdf
62
This section is based on a review of the state-of-the-art evidence on sectors where there is greatest
probability of areas that disproportionately benefit the poorest people. In future, provided that new evidence
emerges on other areas (including global public good investments), this core set of activities can be adapted.
63
Overseas Development Institute, 2013. The age of choice: developing countries in the new aid landscape.
Available at: https://odi.org/en/publications/the-age-of-choice-developing-countries-in-the-new-aid-landscape/
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty?
/ devinit.org
48Development Initiatives (DI) applies the power of data and
evidence to build sustainable solutions.
GLOBAL HUB
Development Initiatives
Our mission is to work closely with partners to ensure data- First Floor Centre, The Quorum
driven evidence and analysis are used effectively in policy and Bond Street South, Bristol
practice to end poverty, reduce inequality and increase BS1 3AE, UK
resilience. +44 (0) 1179 272 505
While data alone cannot bring about a better world, it is a vital EAST AFRICA HUB
part of achieving it. Data has the power to unlock insight, shine a Development Initiatives
light on progress and empower people to increase accountability. Shelter Afrique Building
4th Floor, Mamlaka Road
Content produced by Development Initiatives is licensed under a Nairobi, Kenya
Creative Commons Attribution BY-NC-ND 4.0 International PO Box 102802-00101
license, unless stated otherwise on an image or page. +254 (0) 20 272 5346
Contact AMERICAS HUB
Maria Ana Jalles d’Orey Development Initiatives
Development Finance Lead 1100 13th Street, NW, Suite 800,
maria.jallesdorey@devinit.org Washington DC 20005, US
To find out more about our work visit:
www.devinit.org
Twitter: @devinitorg
Email: info@devinit.org
Development Initiatives is the trading name of Development
Initiatives Poverty Research Ltd, registered in England and
Wales, Company No. 06368740, and DI International Ltd,
registered in England and Wales, Company No. 5802543.
Registered Office: First Floor Centre, The Quorum, Bond Street
South, Bristol, BS1 3AE, UK
How much aid actually reaches the countries with the greatest poverty? / devinit.org
49
